+++
date = '2025-01-26'
draft = false
title = 'Passkey'
+++

A passkey is a FIDO authentication credential based on FIDO standards, that allows a user to sign in to apps and websites with the same steps that they use to unlock their device (biometrics, PIN, or pattern). With passkeys, users no longer need to enter usernames and passwords or additional factors.

The word **passkey** is a common noun; think of it the way you would refer to **password**. It should be written in lowercase except when beginning a sentence or used in a title. The term passkey (and plural form passkeys) is a cross-platform general-use term, not a feature tied to any specific platform.

## Benefits of passkeys

Passkeys are designed to be more convenient for users than remembering and typing passwords. Compared to passwords, signing in with a passkey greatly increases security since a passkey is phishing-resistant and the credential is not reused across contexts.

Sign-in with passkeys has a success rate which is up to 20% higher than typing passwords. The sign-in speed is up to 75% faster than typing passwords.

Passkey sign-ins deliver more successful, faster and more secure authentication.

## Device support for passkeys

Support for passkeys is available on many major operating systems and browsers. These include Android, iOS and iPadOS, macOS, Chrome OS, and Windows OS.

[Device Supported](https://passkeys.dev/device-support/)

## Passkeys are secure by design

By design, a passkey is only presented to the site it was registered with. There is no way for the user to inadvertently type it on an attacker’s site. In addition, the online service does not have the equivalent of a password hash, which can be stolen from the server and cracked by an attacker to figure out the password. The online service only has the public key and it is not computationally feasible to extract the private key from the public key per the mathematics of cryptography.

## Passkeys are private by design

A unique passkey is created for each domain and account. So there is no way for multiple online services to collaborate to track the user. The device unlock (using biometric or PIN) stays local. The online service only sees public keys and signatures from the user's device. For a person to use the private key, the password manager uses an API provided by the operating system to directly leverage the familiar, and private-by-design, device unlock that device operating systems have already been shipping for many years now.


{{< mermaid align="left" theme="neutral" >}}
sequenceDiagram
    participant A AS User Device
    participant P AS Password Manager
    participant S AS Server
    alt registration
    A ->> S: Initiate registration
    P ->> P: create key pair and store private key
    P ->> S: Store the pubic key
    end
    alt signin
    A ->> S: Initiate Sign Process
    S ->> A: Create Random challenge
    A ->> P: Sign the Challenge
    A ->> S: Send the signed info
    S ->> S: Verify the signature
    S ->> A: User Signed In
    end
{{< /mermaid >}}
<!--
```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant A AS User Device
    participant P AS Password Manager
    participant S AS Server
    alt registration
    A ->> S: Initiate registration
    P ->> P: create key pair and store private key
    P ->> S: Store the pubic key
    end
    alt signin
    A ->> S: Initiate Sign Process
    S ->> A: Create Random challenge
    A ->> P: Sign the Challenge
    A ->> S: Send the signed info
    S ->> S: Verify the signature
    S ->> A: User Signed In
    end
``` -->

## Enrolling a passkey with the online service

To begin, the user registers a passkey with the online service. The initiation of registration typically happens either at the sign-in settings page (which the user self-discovers) or through a promotion of the setting to the user (for example, a call to action made to the user by the online service during sign-in).

The passkey registration process typically occurs after the user signs in to the online service account with an existing authentication method. The user approves creation of a passkey by unlocking their device when prompted. The passkey is stored in the user’s password manager (also often referred to as credential manager). If the user does not have a password manager installed, the default password manager which ships with the operating system is used. If the user has chosen to use a security key (hardware device), the passkey is stored on the security key rather than in the device’s password manager.

Passkeys can be synced across devices or stored with a credential manager or on a security key.

## Sign in to the online service with a passkey

When the user attempts to sign-in to the online service, they see a prompt asking them to choose which account they want to use, and then a prompt to unlock their device (or their security key) using a biometric or local PIN. After the user is verified, they are signed-in to their online account. The browser, operating system, and the password manager (or security key) work together to make this a seamless experience.

- **Reference**: https://www.passkeycentral.org/introduction-to-passkeys/